# IQ to Love What Makes Highly Intelligent Men Attractive to Women
## Nelly Litvak
- One day a friend says to him, “Wow, I want to play keyboards like you.” But the musician answered, “No, you do not. If you wanted it, you would have done it. I play at least six hours per day. You do not really want to play keyboards, you just like the idea.”
- She is married to her high-school sweetheart, a down-to-earth man, with a wonderful gentle sense of humor, social tact and dignity. He does not strive for a huge career. He has been loving her all his life. His love makes her shine, and she happily loves him back.
- For any woman, a good match is a man who can give her the love and care that she needs, all other factors are much less important.
- It is actually great that we do not have our life and feelings completely under our control. Given the full control, we would have made our lives a disaster. It is a blessing that some randomness in life helps us to discover what it is that we really need.
- Is it unreasonable? I do not think so. Just think about things that you love to do. Probably, many of them you have discovered just by chance, and not immediately. Why should it be any different in a relationship?
- the charm helps only at the first step. Just as beauty, it does not give any significant advantage in maintaining a loving relationship. I heard wives of charming men complaining, “It is only with other people that he is so friendly and outgoing. At home it is a whole different story.”
- Care should not be confused with rescue. Nowadays, many girls are strong and take pride in rescuing themselves. But they will always need care. The difference is that a part of a rescue operation is feeling good about how heroic you are. But care is only about her, it is not at all about your own brilliance or courage. The only pleasure you get from care is making her happy. And this should be enough, or even all you want.
- Time is a valuable resource, in fact it is the only resource we have, it is finite, and we can use it for so many things. If you want
- A famous poet said, “Habit is our blessing from heaven, it is a substitute for happiness.” Substitute. Please, remember this.
- The trick is often termed as “storytelling”. You have to come up with a story that explains in common language why what you do is so exciting, challenging and important. Preferably, the story should relate your intellectual passion to something that everybody knows. Plus, the story must be short, one-two minutes max. But it must be exciting enough for yourself to start feeling enthusiastic.
- The goal here is to tell this with authentic enthusiasm, and this is hard if you repeat a story by heart. I think you need to prepare just the outline of a story, and fill out the details on the fly.
- What keeps you busy, what do you like to do? This question, most probably, will come up at the very first date,
- I noticed many times that people become happier and more relaxed when they have a serious hobby, like music, or jogging, or painting. As my sister put it, “Just work and family is not enough. These are only two poles, it is an unstable construction. One needs at least three.”
- if a woman complains often about her problems, she does not want your advice. You may find it illogical, but this is how women are wired.
- This is a very big difference between men and women. Men like to keep their problems to themselves, and only share them if they need help, while women simply love to discuss their problems reaching out for compassion, without any constructive outcome.
- Remember this and suppress your “Mr. Fix-it” temptations.
- People in general do not believe everything that is said to them. Rather, they readily believe in their own thoughts and insights. So, you have to let her see your great qualities herself. But you should make this guesswork really easy! It sounds complicated but luckily you can use a familiar trick. Storytelling. Tell her something that will make her think what you want her to think. Stories are fun and reveal a lot about you in a light unimposing way.
- Storytelling is an honest trick. You definitely should not lie. You do not even need to exaggerate. You just present the truth in a suggestive and evidentiary manner. It is an elegant educated style, this is what good authors and journalists usually do. It is also not a manipulation of any sort. She wants to know good things about you. Besides, she is probably using all sorts of honest tricks herself. Enjoy it! It is an interesting game, except it is real, and it helps both of you to discover each other.
- Women crave the trivial stuff, the kind you hear in Hollywood movies. “You look wonderful tonight” works perfectly fine and will work perfectly fine until the end of days.
- if a girl is interested in you, a daisy-shaped radar starts working in her head, catching all your moves, and turning them into a binary signal: “He loves me, he loves me not”.
- Based on these results, the article suggests an excellent point: girls are attracted to men with a high self-esteem. High self-esteem means being confident in your own capacity and consider yourself a person of value.  High self-esteem is so attractive that it becomes a defining success factor in a relationship. A strong interesting girl wants a strong interesting man. As simple as that. This is actually a good news, because self-esteem has nothing to do with “nice” or “bad”, it is a completely different dimension.
- She wants to receive kindness and care only from a man whom she cannot just push around as she likes. Exactly like in sport, victory is as valuable as tough the opponent is.
- She will often prefer to keep it light, have fun, and take some time to figure it out.
- Do not go in for unreturned favors. She will be grateful but not attracted to you for that. For example, imagine she complains about her computer, and you know it will take some time to fix it. If she is your girlfriend, you can just fix it. But if you are trying to win her over, you should not offer her such a convenient free service. “Dating for Geeks” suggests saying something like this, “I can fix it. But then we will go to my favorite bar and you will buy me a beer!”
- Also, even if parents are wealthy, they do not buy everything kids ask for, because kids have to learn the value of money. Likewise, a girl has to learn the value of your care.
- If she does not mean much to you, just accept her rejection with grace and ask out somebody else. But if she is very special, then do not give up right away. Maybe you can convince her to give you a chance.
- So, when Annie starts with “you know, you are really nice …” he sighs deeply, interrupts her speech and asks her to close her eyes. Then he takes her hand and says, “The moment I saw you I knew: here she is, this is the girl I want to be with. You are a wonderful woman and you need to be loved. Please let me love you the way you deserve…”  When Annie opened her eyes and looked at him, she suddenly saw the most attractive man she has ever met.
- It is not about you. It is about her. You must think from her perspective. Anything else simply will not work. Do not explain how much you want this relationship. She will not give you a chance out of pity. Do not try to convince her how great you are. She will not give you a chance on basis of your CV.
- I do believe strongly that occasional pain on the road to getting what you want is a much better deal, even if it’s hard to understand at the very moment of feeling the pain.
